add cep for definition of new keys & values in build format (#56)
conda-incubator/ceps: cep-20.2.md

```

## Package section

```yaml
package:
  # The name of the package
  name: string
  # The version of the package, following the conda version spec
  # Note that versions are always strings (1.23 is _not_ a valid version since it is a `float`. Needs to be quoted.)
  version: string
```

## Build section

```yaml
build:
    # the build number
    number: Option<integer>, defaults to 0
    # the build string. This is usually ommited
    string: Option<string>, defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

    # A list of conditions under which to skip the build of this package
    skip: [list of expressions]

    force_use_keys: [string]
    force_ignore_keys: [string]

    # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"
    noarch: Option<"generic" | "python">

    # Only valid if `noarch: python` - list of all entry points of the package
    # PythonEntryPoint: `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`
    entry_points: [PythonEntryPoint]

    # ?
    osx_is_app: bool (default false)

    # used on conda-forge, still needed?
    preserve_egg_dir: bool (default false)

    # only used as a hack to down-prioritize packages

>     track_features: [string]

Reviewer: Is it a good moment to rename this (even if we use `track_features` under the hood)?

Author: probably!

Reviewer 2: Do we have an actual proposal for what to call the next thing to replace track features? Maybe that has to come first?

Author: I would propose `priority` or `downprioritize` and then an integer (positive or negative)

    # used in many r packages on Windows
    merge_build_host: bool

    # ignore run exports by name
    ignore_run_exports: list

    # ignore run exports coming from the specified packages
    ignore_run_exports_from: list

    # copies fn[.bat/.sh] to the appropriate location, adds `.bat` or `.sh` to the filename
    pre-link: string
    post-link: string
    pre-unlink: string

    # error out when overdepending
    error_overdepending: bool (defaults to ?)
    # error out when overlinking
    error_overlinking: bool (defaults to ?)

    # REMOVED:
    # noarch_python: bool
    # features: list
    # msvc_compiler: str
    # requires_features: dict
    # provides_features: dict
    # preferred_env: str
    # preferred_env_executable_paths: list

    # marked as "still experimental"
    # pin_depends: Enum<"record" | "strict">
    # overlinking_ignore_patterns: [glob]

    # defaults to patchelf (only cudatoolkit is using `lief` for some reason)
    # rpaths_patcher: None
```

## Source section

```yaml
source: [SourceElement]
```

where the different source elements are defined as follows.

### URL source

```yaml
# url pointing to the source tar.gz|zip|tar.bz2|...

> url: url

Reviewer: This can be a list of URLs too (mirrors of the same package with the same hash; used by R packages)

Author: 👍

```

## Test section

Note: the test section also has a weird implicit behavior with `run_test.sh`, `run_test.bat` as well as `run_test.py` and `run_test.pl` script files
that are run as part of the test.

This is the current state of the Test section.

```yaml
test:
  # files (from recipe directory) to include with the tests
  files: [glob]
  # files (from the work directory) to include with the tests
  source_files: [glob]
  # requirements at test time, in the target_platform architecture
  requires: [MatchSpec]
  # commands to execute
  commands: [string]
  # imports to execute with python (e.g. `import <string>`)
  imports: [string]
  # downstream packages that should be tested against this package
  downstreams: [MatchSpec]
```

### Proposal for new test section:

```
test: [TestElement]
```

where the different test elements are defined as follows:

#### Command test element

```yaml
# script to execute
script: string | [string]
# optional extra requirements
extra_requirements:
  # extra requirements with build_platform architecture (emulators, ...)
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # extra run dependencies
  run: [MatchSpec]
# extra files to add to the package for the test

> # Alternatively, use ${{ RECIPE_DIR }} or ${{ SOURCE_DIR }} and a single list?

Reviewer: I like this better, imo.

Reviewer 3: I have mixed feelings. I always found `files` and `source_files` ambiguous. Your proposed format would help. I also like your alternatives, but I feel like it could cause ambiguity. For example, if we allow `${{ RECIPE_DIR }}`, does it mean that we can also do `/absolute/path/to/file`?

# or $RECIPE_DIR / $SRC_DIR ...
files:
  # files from $SRC_DIR
  source: [glob]
  # files from $RECIPE_DIR
  recipe: [glob]
```

#### Import test element

```yaml
# list of imports to try

> imports: [string]

Reviewer: As we move to an language agnostic world, should this be renamed to `python_imports` for clarity?

Author: Or we do

```yaml
python:
  imports:
    - mypkg
    - mypkg.foo
```

With the potential to add more keys, e.g. `pytest` or others?

Reviewer: That could work, yes. I think `pytest` would be better handled as a command anyway, but maybe there are other Python specific checks to be made.

Reviewer 4: I'm thinking renaming `imports` to `python` is sufficient (i.e., language keys are imports):

```
test:
  python:
    - mypkg
    - mypkg.foo
    - mypkg.foo:function
  rust:
    - mypkg
    - mypkg::foo
    - mypkg::foo::function
```

Anything more complex is probably better off in a script?

        cmake --build .
        ./target/hello_world

  - downstream: xtensor-python
  - downstream: xtensor-blas
  - imports:
      - xtensor_python
      - xtensor_python.numpy_adapter
```

Or a multi-output package

```yaml
context:
  name: mamba
  libmamba_version: "1.4.2"
  libmambapy_version: "1.4.2"
  # can also reference previous variables here
  mamba_version: ${{ libmamba_version }}
  release: "2023.04.06"
  libmamba_version_split: ${{ libmamba_version.split('.') }}

# we can leave this out
# package:
#   name: mamba-split

# this is inherited by every output
source:
  url: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/archive/refs/tags/${{ release }}.tar.gz
  sha256: bc1ec3de0dd8398fcc6f524e6607d9d8f6dfeeedb2208ebe0f2070c8fd8fdd83

build:
  number: 0

outputs:
  - package:
      name: libmamba
      version: ${{ libmamba_version }}

    build:
      script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}
      run_exports:
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', max_pin='x.x') }}
      ignore_run_exports:
        - spdlog
        - if: win
          then: python

    requirements:
      build:
        - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
        - cmake
        - ninja

>         - ${{ "python" if win }}

Reviewer: What's the returned value happens when there's no else clause and the if clause is not true? `null`?

Author: Yes, a `Yaml::Null` value (that we filter out in these `ConditionalList`).

      host:
        - libsolv >=0.7.19
        - libcurl
        - openssl
        - libarchive
        - nlohmann_json
        - cpp-expected
        - reproc-cpp >=14.2.1
        - spdlog
        - yaml-cpp
        - cli11
        - fmt

>         - if: win

Reviewer: This could also be `${{ "winreg" if win }}` I assume?

Author: Exactly.

Author: I think that people might prefer the trailing `if` syntax for one liners, and the `if: ...` syntax for lists in lists. What do you think?

          then: winreg

    test:
      - script:
          - if: unix
            then:
              - test -d ${PREFIX}/include/mamba
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/include/mamba/version.hpp
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/lib/cmake/libmamba/libmambaConfig.cmake
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/lib/cmake/libmamba/libmambaConfigVersion.cmake

>               - test -e ${PREFIX}/lib/libmamba${SHLIB_EXT}

Reviewer: Are we considering Jinja functions for this type of tests? e.g. `${{ exists() }}`

Author: No, I am planning to write one more CEP that gets rid of these :) To implement something like the boa "exists" tests: https://boa-build.readthedocs.io/en/latest/recipe_spec.html#check-for-file-existence-in-the-final-package

Author: @jaimergp I made another CEP for the file existence checks. https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/57

  - package:
      name: libmambapy
      version: ${{ libmambapy_version }}
    build:
      script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}
      string: py${{ CONDA_PY }}h${{ PKG_HASH }}_${{ PKG_BUILDNUM }}
      run_exports:
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmambapy', max_pin='x.x') }}
      ignore_run_exports:
        - spdlog
    requirements:
      build:
        - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
        - cmake
        - ninja
        - if: build_platform != target_platform
          then:
            - python
            - cross-python_${{ target_platform }}
            - pybind11
            - pybind11-abi
      host:
        - python
        - pip
        - pybind11
        - pybind11-abi
        - openssl
        - yaml-cpp
        - cpp-expected
        - spdlog
        - fmt
        - termcolor-cpp
        - nlohmann_json
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', exact=True) }}
      run:
        - python
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', exact=True) }}

    test:
      - imports:
          - libmambapy
          - libmambapy.bindings
      - script:

>           - python -c "import libmambapy._version; assert libmambapy._version.__version__ == '{{ libmambapy_version }}'"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          - python -c "import libmambapy._version; assert libmambapy._version.__version__ == '${{ libmambapy_version }}'"
```

          then:
            - python
            - cross-python_${{ target_platform }}
      host:
        - python
        - pip
        - openssl
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmambapy', exact=True) }}
      run:
        - python
        - conda >=4.14,<23.4
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmambapy', exact=True) }}

    test:
      - imports: [mamba]

      - extra_requirements:
          run:
            - pip
        script:
          - mamba --help
          # check dependencies with pip
          - pip check
          - if: win
            then:
              - if exist %PREFIX%\condabin\mamba.bat (exit 0) else (exit 1)
          - if: linux
            then:
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/etc/profile.d/mamba.sh
              # these tests work when run on win, but for some reason not during conda build
              - mamba create -n test_py2 python=2.7 --dry-run
              - mamba install xtensor xsimd -c conda-forge --dry-run

          - if: unix
            then:
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/condabin/mamba

          # for some reason tqdm doesn't have a proper colorama dependency so pip check fails
          # but that's completely unrelated to mamba

>           - python -c "import mamba._version; assert mamba._version.__version__ == '{{ mamba_version }}'"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          - python -c "import mamba._version; assert mamba._version.__version__ == '${{ mamba_version }}'"
```

  # imports to execute with python (e.g. `import <string>`)
  imports: [string]
  # downstream packages that should be tested against this package
  downstreams: [MatchSpec]
```

### Proposal for new test section:

```
test: [TestElement]
```

where the different test elements are defined as follows:

#### Command test element

```yaml
# script to execute
script: string | [string]
# optional extra requirements
extra_requirements:
  # extra requirements with build_platform architecture (emulators, ...)
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # extra run dependencies
  run: [MatchSpec]
# extra files to add to the package for the test
# Alternatively, use ${{ RECIPE_DIR }} or ${{ SOURCE_DIR }} and a single list?
# or $RECIPE_DIR / $SRC_DIR ...
files:
  # files from $SRC_DIR
  source: [glob]
  # files from $RECIPE_DIR
  recipe: [glob]
```

#### Import test element

```yaml
# list of imports to try
imports: [string]
```

#### Downstream test element

```yaml
downstream: MatchSpec
```

## Outputs section

conda-build has very hard to understand behavior with multiple outputs. We propose some drastic simplifications.
Each output in the new format has the same keys as a "top-level" recipe.

> Values from the top-level `build` and `about` section are merged into the outputs. The `version` from the top-level

Author: Yes, when you have outputs, no outer requirements section is allowed.

> Values from the top-level `build` and `about` section are merged into the outputs. The `version` from the top-level

Reviewer 2: ohhhhhh I read that as the build env, not the build section. Sorry!

      # everything the same as top level
      script: ...
    requirements:
      # same definition as top level

    # as top level, by default merged from outer recipe
    about:
    source:
    test:
```

A cache only package does only package the `$WORK_DIR` (similar to how top-level packages work today) and each output that depends on a cache package via `cache_from`
will get a prepared `$WORK_DIR` with the build artifacts from the previously executed package.

> **Note**
> Should run-dependencies from the cache_only package be inherited? That would make `run_exports` work better ...

## About section

```yaml
about:
  # The license
  # We can enforce SPDX for license?
  license: string
  # license files
  license_file: path | [path] (relative paths are found in source directory _or_ recipe directory)
  # a summary of what this package does
  summary: string
  # a longer description of what this package does (should we allow referencing files here?)
  description: string
  # URL to the homepage
  home: url
  # url to the repository - rename?
  dev_url: url
  # URL to the docs
  doc_url: url
  # unsure if we should keep this one
  license_url: url

  # REMOVED:

>   # prelink_message:

Reviewer 5: this bit here was added for EULA like stuffs that needs confirmation from the user, I believe NVIDIA or/and intel folks use it? or at least they were keen to have it. I would be careful in removing this one :)

Reviewer 2: Yes I 100% agree. We have to keep this.

Reviewer 2: I suppose we could use prelink scripts? @jakirkham can comment for the nvidia stuff.

Author: They aren't using it on conda-forge (I checked)

Author: I am also keen on dropping the `post-link`, `pre-link`, and `post-unlink` keys in `build`.

Reviewer 2: The keys or the scripts themselves or both? IDK actually what those keys do in a recipe.

Author: The keys in the recipe. We would keep the files.

Reviewer 5: Prelink_message is mainly for eula purposes that the user needs to accept it, it is not related to the prelink and postlink script that are, as far I'm concerned, deprecated

Reviewer 6: > prelink and postlink script that are, as far I'm concerned, deprecated

post-link and pre-unlink should only be deprecated if similar functionality is offered elsewhere.

> The keys in the recipe. We would keep the files.

Personally, I'm not a big fan of the "some file relative to `meta.yaml`/`recipe.yaml` triggers some implicit behavior" thing.
(I'd even go as far as removing the implicit invocation of `build.sh`/`bld.bat` -- but that might upset people :shrug:.)

Reviewer 7: Was there a resolution to this for packages that want / need to display some kind of EULA message or even want to require some kind of interaction from a user, i.e. accepting a EULA?

NVIDIA legal seems to be appeased currently, but from experience these decisions can change, and there will likely be uses outside of NVIDIA packages as well.

Reviewer: It feels like the "if a file named in this particular way is found then we do X" behaviour will stay, but the keys to change how that file is named will not... If we do so, I'd rather we do it like we treat activation scripts (their _target_ location is the trigger, not the source one); but that doesn't work well for pre-link & post-unlink because the files will be gone.

  # compile a test package
  - if: unix
    then:
      files:
        - testfiles/cmake/*
      extra_requirements:
        build:
          - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
          - cmake
          - ninja
      script: |
        cd testiles/cmake/
        mkdir build; cd build
        cmake -GNinja ..
        cmake --build .
        ./target/hello_world

  - downstream: xtensor-python
  - downstream: xtensor-blas
  - imports:
      - xtensor_python
      - xtensor_python.numpy_adapter
```

Or a multi-output package

```yaml
context:
  name: mamba
  libmamba_version: "1.4.2"
  libmambapy_version: "1.4.2"
  # can also reference previous variables here
  mamba_version: ${{ libmamba_version }}
  release: "2023.04.06"
  libmamba_version_split: ${{ libmamba_version.split('.') }}

# we can leave this out
# package:
#   name: mamba-split

# this is inherited by every output
source:
  url: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/archive/refs/tags/${{ release }}.tar.gz
  sha256: bc1ec3de0dd8398fcc6f524e6607d9d8f6dfeeedb2208ebe0f2070c8fd8fdd83

build:
  number: 0

outputs:
  - package:
      name: libmamba
      version: ${{ libmamba_version }}

    build:

>       script:
>         script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
      script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}
```
Was this a mistake?

Also, on a related note, I've always found it confusing that `script:` can either be a string that is the name of a file which is a script or it can be a list of strings which will be converted into a bash or bat script. What can this new format do to make this less confusing?

Author: Yep, that was a mistake, thanks! 

I see two ways of achieving this, either by having another level in the dict, e.g.

```yaml
script:
  file: myfile.sh
  # or
  content: |
    ....
```

Or having an additional key, like `script_file` vs `script` or something like that.

Ok, maybe a third one would be something like: `script: ${{ embed("build.sh") }}` and write a jinja function that pulls in the contents of the file. This could be quite useful for other files as well (e.g. `README`, ...).

Reviewer 2: I have to say that I like the current syntax a lot but I get that it is confusing.

Reviewer 9: This could potentially allow choosing the interpreter to use:
```yaml
script:
  shell: bash
  file: build.sh
```

Reviewer 8: > I have to say that I like the current syntax a lot but I get that it is confusing.

@beckermr Could you elaborate on why you like that `script:` is a keyword with two different meanings?

Reviewer 2: I like not having to remember the different names for the different things.

Reviewer 10: Actually my first thought when I saw `script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}` was: "can't we have a default that abstracts away the different file extensions?"

Something like[^1]:
```
        script: build_mamba  # will use .sh on unix and .bat on win
```

If someone needs differently named scripts, they could always drop down to selectors, but it would make one more source of noise go away in the vast majority of cases.

[^1]: if we need to disambiguate from `script:` for compatibility (is this relevant in a new format that's already breaking things?), we could name the key `script_auto_ext:` or something like that.

Reviewer 10: Actually the logic for that could be (since `build_mamba` / `build_mamba.sh` / etc. are just strings): If `$script + ".sh"` exists (on unix; `.bat` on windows) execute it, if it doesn't exist, assume the extension is already in the script, i.e. execute `$script`.

      run_exports:
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', max_pin='x.x') }}
      ignore_run_exports:
        - spdlog
        - if: win
          then: python

    requirements:
      build:
        - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
        - cmake
        - ninja

>         - ${{ python if win }}

Reviewer 2: Is python an int value here or a string? Maybe we should require it to be a string in this syntax so people do not have to guess?

Author: correct, this is a typo! it should be quoted to be a `jinja` string

Author: Fixed, thanks!

  recipe with a computer
- iron out some inconsistencies around multiple outputs (build vs. build/script
  and more)
- remove any need for recursive parsing & solving
- cater to needs for automation and dependency tree analysis via a determinstic
  format

## Major differences with conda-build

Outputs and top-level package are mutually exclusive, and outputs have exactly the same structure as top-level keys.
If outputs exist, the top-level keys are 'merged' with the output keys (e.g. for the about section).

# Format

## Schema version

The implicit version of the YAML schema for a recipe is an integer 1. 
To discern between the "old" format and the new format, we utilize the file name.
The old format is `meta.yaml` and the new format is `recipe.yaml`.
The version can be explicitly set by adding a `schema_version` key to the recipe.

```yaml
# optional, since implicitly defaults to 1
schema_version: 1  # integer
```

To benefit from autocompletion, and other LSP features in editors, we can add a schema URL to the recipe.

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prefix-dev/recipe-format/main/schema.json
```

> ## Context section

Reviewer: The `context` object in conda and mamba might introduce confusion for those familiar with the term (arguably a small subset, probably conda contributors), but anyway I wonder if there's any value in being more explicit about this and just call it `variables` or `constants`.

Author: I think `variables` could be fine. I am also thinking we could allow "variables" to be passed in on the command line ... github actions style :) But maybe that's for later.

Reviewer 11: `config`? Does this section do one and the same thing as the cbc.yaml, i.e. define jinja variables?

```yaml
# The context dictionary defines arbitrary key-value pairs for Jinja interpolation
# and replaces the {% set ... %} commands commonly used in recipes
context:
  variable: test
  # note that we can reference previous values, that means that they are rendered in order
  other_variable: test_${{ variable }}
```

## Package section

```yaml
package:
  # The name of the package
  name: string
  # The version of the package, following the conda version spec
  # Note that versions are always strings (1.23 is _not_ a valid version since it is a `float`. Needs to be quoted.)
  version: string
```

## Build section

```yaml

> build:

Reviewer: I would even say that this section should be renamed. The `build` term is too loaded in the ecosystem already, so I'd rather be more specific about this section tries to configure. Something like:

* `build_settings`
* `build_options`
* `build_parameters`

Author: I agree that it is confusing to have "build" in the requirements as well as in the "top-level". I wouldn't be opposed ot change it to `settings` or `options`, maybe even without the `build_` prefix.

Reviewer 4: What if we combine `build` with the `package` section? I've always found it a little odd how the name and version is separate from the number and string

Reviewer 11: +1 for combining build and package. In general I find it somewhat difficult to remember which keys go where in the package/source/build area of the recipe, and it would be nice to clean this area up a bit.

Reviewer: Any decisions made here?

  # the build number
  number: Option<integer>, defaults to 0
  # the build string. This is usually ommited
  string: Option<string>, defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

  # A list of conditions under which to skip the build of this package
  skip: [list of expressions]

  force_use_keys: [string]
  force_ignore_keys: [string]

  # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"
  noarch: Option<"generic" | "python">

  # PythonEntryPoint: `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`
  entry_points: [PythonEntryPoint]

  # Use the python.app for the entrypoint (not exactly sure what that means in practice)
  osx_is_app: bool (default false)

  # used on conda-forge, still needed?
  preserve_egg_dir: bool (default false)

  # only used as a hack to down-prioritize packages
  track_features: [string]

  # skip compiling pyc for some files
  skip_compile_pyc: [glob]

  # do not soft- or hard-link these files, but always copy them
  no_link: [glob]

  # the script that is executed to build the package
  # if it is only one element and ends with `.sh` or `.bat`
  script: string | [string]

  # linux only, list of rpaths

>   rpaths: [path] (defaults to ['lib/'])

Reviewer 10: This currently works on osx (though undocumented), but it would be really nice if we could have the same (or similar) functionality on windows, which [comes up](https://github.com/conda/conda-build/issues/4753) for example in adding SP_DIR to the rpath for some packages.

  # include files even if they are already in the environment as part of some other
  # host dependency
  always_include_files: [path]

  # wether to relocate binaries or not. If this is a list of paths, then
  # only the listed paths are relocated
  binary_relocation: bool (defaults to true) | [glob]

  # force file to be detected as TEXT file (for prefix replacement)
  has_prefix_files: [path]

  # force file to be detected as BINARY file (for prefix replacement)
  binary_has_prefix_files: [path]

  # ignore all or specific files for prefix replacement
  ignore_prefix_files: bool | [path] (defaults to false)

  # wether to detect binary files with prefix or not
  detect_binary_files_with_prefix: bool (defaults to true on Unix and (always) false on Windows)

  # Wether to include the recipe or not in the final package
  include_recipe: bool (defaults to true)

  # environment variables to either pass through to the script environment or set

>   script_env: [env_vars]

Reviewer: I always felt this name was very ambiguous (specially due to the presence of `script` elsewhere). `env_vars` is a better term, or even `environment_variables`.

Author: I actually need to update the spec because we have already updated this in the recipe-format repository: https://github.com/prefix-dev/recipe-format/blob/f673bbc5778be4ce0d4e2765c89cf45948eb7caa/model.py#L130-L141

Although I just saw that we kept the `script_env` name. Happy to adjust that to something else...

  # A run export adds a dependency to the run requirements of a package if listed in build or host dependencies

>   run_exports: [MatchSpec] OR {strong: [MatchSpec], weak: [MatchSpec], strong_constrains: [MatchSpec], weak_constrains: [MatchSpec], noarch: [MatchSpec]}

Author: It's a run export that get's attached to a `noarch` package. This is currently already in conda-build.

If you build a `noarch: python` package and depend on `python` in your host section, the `python` dependency will be added to your run dependencies (as opposed to `python X.X` which happens in the "arch" builds).

E.g. python 3.10 run exports are:

```
weak: python 3.8.*
noarch: python
```

  # Allow linking against libraries that are not in the run requirements
  missing_dso_whitelist: [glob]

  # Allow runpath / rpath to point to these locations outside of the environment
  runpath_whitelist: [glob]

  # This is only used in the pip feedstock.
  disable_pip: bool (defaults to false)

  # merge the build and host environments (used in many R packages on Windows)
  merge_build_host: bool

  # ignore run exports by name
  ignore_run_exports: list

  # ignore run exports coming from the specified packages

>   ignore_run_exports_from: list

Author: Hmm, maybe. The run exports section is something that gets embedded into the final build output, while these are ways to control the "other end" of the run exports (which should _not_ be applied). But maybe there is a way to bundle them, idk.

  # copies fn[.bat/.sh] to the appropriate location, adds `.bat` or `.sh` to the filename
  pre-link: string
  post-link: string
  pre-unlink: string

  # error out when overdepending
  error_overdepending: bool (defaults to ?)
  # error out when overlinking
  error_overlinking: bool (defaults to ?)

  # REMOVED:
  # noarch_python: bool
  # features: list
  # msvc_compiler: str
  # requires_features: dict
  # provides_features: dict
  # preferred_env: str
  # preferred_env_executable_paths: list

  # marked as "still experimental"
  # pin_depends: Enum<"record" | "strict">
  # overlinking_ignore_patterns: [glob]

  # defaults to patchelf (only cudatoolkit is using `lief` for some reason)
  # rpaths_patcher: None
```

## Source section

```yaml
source: [SourceElement]
```

where the different source elements are defined as follows.

### URL source

```yaml
# url pointing to the source tar.gz|zip|tar.bz2|...
url: url
# destination folder in work directory

> folder: path

Reviewer: Another opportunity for a more explicit rename. I initially thought this was the folder inside the artifact that should be extracted or fetched. Instead I'd rather have `destination` or `target_directory` for clarity.

# hash of the file
sha256: hex string

> # absolute or relative path from recipe file

Reviewer 12: Should we support absolute paths at all?  Feels kinda weird.

patches: [path]
# removed keys

> # fn: string

Author: We need to bring this one back as it can be useful for test files (the opencv-feedstock uses it to put a video in the right spot). We'll rename it to `file_name` though.

# md5: hex string
# sha1: hex string
```

### Local source

```yaml
# file, absolute or relative to recipe file
path: path
# destination folder
folder: path
# absolute or relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Git source

```yaml
# URL to the git repository or path to local git repository
git_url: url | path
# revision to checkout to (commit or tag)
git_rev: string
git_depth: signed integer (defaults to -1 -> not shallow)
```

### Removed source definitions

SVN and HG (mercury) source definitions are removed as they are not relevant anymore.

> ## Requirements section

Reviewer: All these environments have `[MatchSpec]` as a value, but we have not standardized what `MatchSpec` is, right?

Right now, we expect the 3-field, space-separated "conda build spec", but there are feature requests to support channel specs there too.

This might be out of scope for this CEP, but for now I'd write a couple lines on the expected syntax:

```
package-name [version [build string]]
```

Author: I added a section for this

```yaml
requirements:
  # build time dependencies, in the build_platform architecture
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # dependencies to link against, in the target_platform architecture

>   host: [MatchSpec]

Reviewer: Echoing the discussion in Element, there's an opportunity here to rename `host` to `target`, and align it with `target_platform`, which IMO better describes the intent.

It's true that it conflates a bit with the [GCC terminology](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/Configure-Terms.html), but in all honesty, the conda ecosystem is mostly non-compiler packages so I am not sure where the value in keeping this relic of autotools is.

Reviewer 11: Without being familiar with GCC terminology, but being familiar with conda recipes, I find build/target/run to be more descriptive of what's going on, especially when those terms are appended with "environment".

Reviewer 13: Please don't change it to `target`. It needlessly confuses things. `target_platform` variable is wrong IMO. It should have been `host_platform.
We need better docs on `build, host, run`.

Reviewer 10: I think `target` is way way way easier for people to catch on to and that accepting some ambiguity in the full Canadian cross case is preferable to having this large hurdle to understanding.

That said, we need good docs in either case. I've picked up a lot of bits and pieces over the years, but I've held off on writing docs because of the inevitable "you're wrong about X".

To illustrate what I mean, the most understandable explanation from my POV for the distinction between build and host is the basic cross-compilation case, where the distinction is easy to get (e.g. we have x64 agents to build, but the final package needs to run on <arch>; the build-time dependencies for that architecture are in `host`, etc etc). That explanation is not 100% accurate, but way more effective for transmitting the essentials. However I've never had the energy to face that discussion.

In short: +1 for target

Reviewer 13: I'm -100 for target. There are two different nomenclatures.
1. autotools and conda - build and host
2. cmake etc. - host and target

Now, this suggestion is to introduce a third
3. build and target

Please don't add a third into the mix. Somewhat related meme: https://xkcd.com/927/

  downstreams: [MatchSpec]
```
</details>

```
test: [TestElement]
```

The new test section consists of a list of test elements. Each element is executed independently and can have different requirements. There are multiple types of test elements defined, such as the `command` test element, the `python` test element and the `downstream` test element.

#### Command test element

```yaml
# script to execute
script: string | [string]
# optional extra requirements
extra_requirements:
  # extra requirements with build_platform architecture (emulators, ...)
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # extra run dependencies
  run: [MatchSpec]
# extra files to add to the package for the test
# Alternatively, use ${{ RECIPE_DIR }} or ${{ SOURCE_DIR }} and a single list?
# or $RECIPE_DIR / $SRC_DIR ...
files:
  # files from $SRC_DIR
  source: [glob]
  # files from $RECIPE_DIR
  recipe: [glob]
```

#### Python test element

```yaml
python:
  # list of imports to try
  imports: [string]
```

#### Downstream test element

```yaml
downstream: MatchSpec
```

## Outputs section

conda-build has very hard to understand behavior with multiple outputs. We propose some drastic simplifications.

> Each output in the new format has the same keys as a "top-level" recipe.

Reviewer 8: I believe that the reason people find multiple-output workflows with conda-build confusing is that it was originally intended to only be used for a "build once, then split" workflow. In that workflow, the outputs [only do one of two things](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/stable/resources/define-metadata.html#specifying-files-to-include-in-output): installation to / removal from the $PREFIX via script, or splitting of files already in the $PREFIX via a glob list. However, people have used the `outputs/script` key for scripts that do MORE than just moving files, but also doing additional build steps. i.e. They try to use the top-level recipe as a cached build which is continued and reused multiple times.

My understanding is that this proposal moves the recipe spec away from "build once, then split" towards a graph of multiple build caches and multiple outputs. The only use case for multi-cache multi-output I know of is a mixed C/Python package where a C library is wrapped in Python extensions which must be recompiled for each Python version. By moving to a recipe specification that explicitly has the concept of cached builds, this makes this type of combined multi-output recipe more efficient because the C library is reused? However, for conda-forge at least, feedstocks run each Python build in parallel, so enabling this type of caching will not be immediately beneficial. In practice, I actually encourage maintainers to use separate recipes in the case described above because it avoids multi-output recipes and migrations of the C library don't trigger unnecessary rebuilds of the python package.

I think the proposed "multi-cache, multi-output" workflow is MORE complicated instead of simpler. An actual simplification of the outputs section would remove the `script` option from outputs and only allow pattern matching (but use REGEX to make it more powerful?). This would enforce a "build once, then split" workflow and avoid the common issues which arise when people try to use the output script for doing additional build steps instead of just moving/selecting files.

Perhaps you could be more specific in this proposal about the problem using the current outputs section, some example use cases where it fails, and the type of workflow you want to enable with the new outputs section.

Author: You are right, but you are also missing some of the tricky behavior from conda. Namely that requirements from the top level are mixed into the requirements of the output (that has the same name as the top-level recipe).

Splitting packages is also pretty difficult.
I think people are relatively used to re-use caches e.g. from Github actions. I hope we have an implementation of this soon in rattler-build so you can try it out.

Rebuilding the (existing) C library (as you describe) can hopefully also be avoided if we do some more clever things regarding hashes and comparing if builds already exist.

Reviewer 8: On further reflection, I think that these proposed changes to the outputs section are more than just new keys and values. They are actually implying a fundamental change of the documented (canonical?) conda-build workflow (as opposed to just moving or change the names of exisitng keys) and should be their own CEP.

P.S. I think the flatpak build system is designed to have cached modular components with arbitrary dependency graphs, so maybe we can steal some design or implementation ideas from them?

Author: I am not opposed to split out the outputs work into another CEP and leave it undefined in this CEP.
For now we'd still implement as laid out here, but open to changes.

Reviewer 14: > mixed C/Python package where a C library is wrapped in Python extensions which must be recompiled for each Python version

This was one of the main workflows intended. Splitting files up was definitely a major use case (for GCC packages back at this feature's inception), but making wrapper builds in a matrix was equally important (for xgboost back at this feature's inception).

Not that history really matters here. What matters is how hard it is to use, and whether it is saving anyone any time.

  homepage: url
  # URL to the repository (used to be `dev_url`)
  repository: url
  # URL to the documentation (used to be `doc_url`)
  documentation: url

  # REMOVED:
  # prelink_message:
  # license_family: string (deprecated due to SPDX)
  # identifiers: [string]
  # tags: [string]
  # keywords: [string]
  # doc_source_url: url
```

## Extra section

```yaml
# a free form YAML dictionary
extra:
  <key>: <value>
```

## Example recipe

What follows is an example recipe, using the YAML syntax discussed in https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/54

```yaml
context:
  name: xtensor
  version: 0.24.6

package:
  name: ${{ name|lower }}
  version: ${{ version }}

source:
  url: https://github.com/xtensor-stack/xtensor/archive/${{ version }}.tar.gz
  sha256: f87259b51aabafdd1183947747edfff4cff75d55375334f2e81cee6dc68ef655

build:
  number: 0
  skip:
    # note that the value is a minijinja expression
    - osx or win

requirements:
  build:
    - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
    - cmake
    - if: unix
      value: make
  host:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8
  run:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8
  run_constrained:
    - xsimd >=8.0.3,<10

test:
  - script:
      - if: unix

>         value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        then:
```

Typo?

# A new recipe format – part 2 - the allowed keys & values

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> A new recipe format - values </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Proposed</td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td> Wolf Vollprecht &lt;wolf@prefix.dev&gt;</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> May 23, 2023</td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> May 23, 2023</td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td>  </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td>https://github.com/prefix-dev/rattler-build</td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

We propose a new recipe format that is heavily inspired by conda-build. The main
change is a pure YAML format without arbitrary Jinja or comments with semantic
meaning.

## Motivation

The conda-build format is currently under-specified. For the new format, we try to list all values

> and types in a single document and document them. This is part of a larger effort (see [](/cep-20.1.md) for the new YAML syntax).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and types in a single document and document them. This is part of a larger effort (see [CEP-13](/cep-13.md) for the new YAML syntax).
```

https://github.com/mamba-org/conda-specs/blob/master/proposed_specs/recipe.md
The reason for a new spec are:

- Make it easier to parse ("pure yaml"). conda-build uses a mix of comments and
  jinja to achieve a great deal of flexibility, but it's hard to parse the
  recipe with a computer
- iron out some inconsistencies around multiple outputs (build vs. build/script
  and more)
- remove any need for recursive parsing & solving
- cater to needs for automation and dependency tree analysis via a determinstic
  format

## Major differences with conda-build

Outputs and top-level package are mutually exclusive, and outputs have exactly the same structure as top-level keys.
If outputs exist, the top-level keys are 'merged' with the output keys (e.g. for the about section).

# Format

## Schema version

The implicit version of the YAML schema for a recipe is an integer 1. 
To discern between the "old" format and the new format, we utilize the file name.
The old format is `meta.yaml` and the new format is `recipe.yaml`.
The version can be explicitly set by adding a `schema_version` key to the recipe.

```yaml
# optional, since implicitly defaults to 1
schema_version: 1  # integer

> ```

Reviewer 4: I wouldn't force a rename of `meta.yaml` (but I'd welcome the option to calling it `recipe.yaml`). Instead, I'd enforce `schema_version>=1` for the newer format, so no `schema_version` implies `0` and is today's underspecified format.

Reviewer 15: The problem with that is that the old format is not valid yaml. So to properly know, one would have to use some of the old parsing logic/magic as well.

  and more)
- remove any need for recursive parsing & solving
- cater to needs for automation and dependency tree analysis via a determinstic
  format

## Major differences with conda-build

Outputs and top-level package are mutually exclusive, and outputs have exactly the same structure as top-level keys.
If outputs exist, the top-level keys are 'merged' with the output keys (e.g. for the about section).

# Format

## Schema version

The implicit version of the YAML schema for a recipe is an integer 1. 
To discern between the "old" format and the new format, we utilize the file name.
The old format is `meta.yaml` and the new format is `recipe.yaml`.
The version can be explicitly set by adding a `schema_version` key to the recipe.

```yaml
# optional, since implicitly defaults to 1
schema_version: 1  # integer
```

To benefit from autocompletion, and other LSP features in editors, we can add a schema URL to the recipe.

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prefix-dev/recipe-format/main/schema.json
```

## Context section

```yaml
# The context dictionary defines arbitrary key-value pairs for Jinja interpolation

> # and replaces the {% set ... %} commands commonly used in recipes

Reviewer 3: I'm curious, does it accept any valid YAML values? Like can we store maps and lists?
```
context:
  requirements:
    - python
    - requests
    - etc
```

Author: For the moment this should only accept scalars.

Reviewer 3: Should this be documented?

- `libmambapy` -> creates multiple packages, one per python version
- `mamba` -> creates multiple packages (one per python + libmambapy version)

<img width="1527" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 48 59" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/3ddb7ddb-f563-4842-91d6-d9f8c91b83e0">

This has historically been an issue in conda-build, as it didn't take into account `pin_subpackage` edges as "variants" and
sometimes created the same hashes for two different outputs. E.g. in the following situation, conda-build would only create a single
`foofoo` package (instead of two variants that exactly pin two different libfoo packages):

<img width="2065" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 47 49" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/0c3ec263-0d00-45a7-b6fc-84e9b8daffa6">

## About section

```yaml
about:
  # a summary of what this package does
  summary: string
  # a longer description of what this package does (should we allow referencing files here?)
  description: string

  # the license of the package in SPDX format
  license: string (SPDX enforced)
  # the license files
  license_file: path | [path] (relative paths are found in source directory _or_ recipe directory)

>   # URL that points to the license

Reviewer 3: Should we define what tools are supposed to do with that URL? Is the URL only stored in the artifact as is or should tools actually download the file at the given URL?

  string: Option<string>, defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

  # A list of conditions under which to skip the build of this package (they are joined by `or`)
  skip: [list of expressions]

  # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"
  noarch: Option<"generic" | "python">

  # script can be a single string or a list of strings
  # if script is a single string and ends with `.sh` or `.bat`, then we interpret it as a file
  script: str | [str] | Script

  # would love to get rid of this:
  # merge the build and host environments (used in many R packages on Windows)
  # was `merge_build_host`
  merge_build_and_host_envs: bool (defaults to false)

  # include files even if they are already in the environment
  # as part of some other host dependency
  always_include_files: [path]

  variant:
    # Keys to forcibly use for the variant computation (even if they are not in the dependencies)
    use_keys: [string]

    # Keys to forcibly ignore for the variant computation (even if they are in the dependencies)
    ignore_keys: [string]

    # used to prefer this variant less
    # note: was `track_features`

>     down_prioritize_variant: integer (negative, defaults to 0)

Reviewer 11: Or is this logic to keep backwards compatibility with track_features somehow?

>     down_prioritize_variant: integer (negative, defaults to 0)

Author: Yeah this would render into a track-feature, yes (to make the output compatible with `conda` and `legacy-conda` (pre-libmamba).

>     down_prioritize_variant: integer (negative, defaults to 0)

Reviewer: I feel like `priority` would be confusing due to how the term is used in "channel priority" and such.

    # was `ignore_prefix_files`
    ignore: bool | [path] (defaults to false)

    # wether to detect binary files with prefix or not
    # was `detect_binary_files_with_prefix`
    ignore_binary_files: bool (defaults to true on Unix and (always) false on Windows)

  # settings for shared libraries and executables
  shared_libraries:
    # linux only, list of rpaths (was rpath)
    rpaths: [path] (defaults to ['lib/'])

    # wether to relocate binaries or not. If this is a list of paths, then
    # only the listed paths are relocated
    binary_relocation: bool (defaults to true) | [glob]

    # Allow linking against libraries that are not in the run requirements
    # (was `missing_dso_whitelist`)
    missing_dso_allowlist: [glob]

    # Allow runpath / rpath to point to these locations outside of the environment
    # (was `runpath_whitelist`)
    rpath_allowlist: [glob]

    # what to do when detecting overdepending
    overdepending_behavior: str # one of "ignore" or "error" (defaults to "error")

    # what to do when detecting overlinking
    overlinking_behavior: str # one of "ignore" or "error" (defaults to "error")

>   ignore_run_exports:

Reviewer 11: Would this be better off in the `requirements` section, since it's about dependency specification?

```

### Git source

```yaml
# URL to the git repository or path to local git repository
git: url | path
# the following 3 keys are mutually exclusive (branch, tag, and rev)
# branch to checkout to
branch: string
# tag to checkout to
tag: string
# revision to checkout to (hash or ref)
rev: string
# depth of the git clone (mutually exclusive with rev)
depth: signed integer (defaults to -1 -> not shallow)
# should this use git-lfs?
lfs: bool (defaults to false)
# destination folder in work directory
target_directory: path
# absolute or relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Removed source definitions

SVN and HG (mercury) source definitions are removed as they are not relevant anymore.

## Requirements section

```yaml
requirements:
  # build time dependencies, in the build_platform architecture
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # dependencies to link against, in the target_platform architecture
  host: [MatchSpec]
  # the section below is copied into the index.json and required at package installation
  run: [MatchSpec]
  # constrain optional packages
  run_constrained: [MatchSpec]
  # the run exports of this package
  run_exports: [MatchSpec] OR RunExports
```

> #### `RunExports` section

Reviewer 11: Has it been considered to remove `run_exports`? It would be nicer, IMHO, if the information for usage of a host or build dependency was captured somehow, and then it was up to the author of the downstream recipe to correctly specify the run dependencies manually. More explicit, easier to debug dependency conflicts, etc.

Author: yes, once the new format is done all future changes will be much easier because we can properly lint the YAML and do automatic upgrades. The initial one is the hardest.

There is no problem changing the recipe spec in the future.

Reviewer 11: Thanks, so basically the main thing we're tackling in this chain of CEPs is to remove the semantic comments/jinja flow-control/other stuff that goes away from pure YAML with a few jinja functions and variable substitution?

Author: Yeah I would also expect _a lot_ of opposition. Would love to see a CEP with a better idea than run exports though! I am also open to improve the words (weak, strong, etc.) but haven't come up wtih anything better yet (they would still "render" to the same run_exports.json file as today, just different name in the recipe).

Reviewer 14: @danpetry you may not have experienced the compatibility hell before run_exports. The whole idea is that the people who maintain a library (or the package for it) are the best ones to understand how its compatibility changes. If you remove the idea of run_exports, you are instead imposing that knowledge on every consumer of the package. It requires a LOT more knowledge from a lot more people.

People at NVIDIA have asked if we could be more descriptive about where a particular dependency in the rendered recipe came from. This might help with your confusion without sacrificing the centralization of compatibility knowledge.

For example, some verbose mode could output something when a dependency's run_exports are being taken into account. This could just be log output, or it could somehow annotate a rendered version of the recipe.

## Requirements section

```yaml
requirements:
  # build time dependencies, in the build_platform architecture
  build: [MatchSpec]
  # dependencies to link against, in the target_platform architecture
  host: [MatchSpec]
  # the section below is copied into the index.json and required at package installation
  run: [MatchSpec]
  # constrain optional packages (was `run_constrained`)
  run_constraints: [MatchSpec]
  # the run exports of this package
  run_exports: [MatchSpec] OR RunExports

  # the run exports to ignore when calculating the requirements
  ignore_run_exports:
    # ignore run exports by name (e.g. `libgcc-ng`)
    by_name: [string]
    # ignore run exports that come from the specified packages
    from_package: [string]

```

#### `RunExports` section

The different kind of run exports that can be specified are:

```yaml
# strong run exports go from build -> host & -> run
strong: [MatchSpec]
# weak run exports go from host -> run or build -> host
weak: [MatchSpec]
# strong constrains adds a run constraint from build -> run_constraints (was `strong_constrains`)
strong_constraints: [MatchSpec]

> # weak constrains adds a run constraint from host -> run_constrained (was `weak_constrains`)

Reviewer 3: `run_constraints` instead of `run_constrained`?

  license_url: url

  # URL to the homepage (used to be `home`)
  homepage: url
  # URL to the repository (used to be `dev_url`)
  repository: url
  # URL to the documentation (used to be `doc_url`)
  documentation: url

  # REMOVED:
  # prelink_message:
  # license_family: string (deprecated due to SPDX)
  # identifiers: [string]
  # tags: [string]
  # keywords: [string]
  # doc_source_url: url
```

## Extra section

```yaml
# a free form YAML dictionary
extra:
  <key>: <value>
```

## Example recipe

What follows is an example recipe, using the YAML syntax discussed in https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/54

```yaml
context:
  name: xtensor
  version: 0.24.6

package:
  name: ${{ name|lower }}
  version: ${{ version }}

source:
  url: https://github.com/xtensor-stack/xtensor/archive/${{ version }}.tar.gz
  sha256: f87259b51aabafdd1183947747edfff4cff75d55375334f2e81cee6dc68ef655

build:
  number: 0
  skip:
    # note that the value is a minijinja expression
    - osx or win

requirements:
  build:
    - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
    - cmake
    - if: unix
      value: make
  host:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8
  run:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8

>   run_constrained:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  run_constraints:
```

rev: string
# depth of the git clone (mutually exclusive with rev)
depth: signed integer (defaults to -1 -> not shallow)
# should this use git-lfs?
lfs: bool (defaults to false)
# destination folder in work directory
target_directory: path
# absolute or relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Removed source definitions

SVN and HG (mercury) source definitions are removed as they are not relevant anymore.

## Requirements section

```yaml
requirements:
  # build time dependencies, in the build_platform architecture
  build: [PackageSelector]
  # dependencies to link against, in the target_platform architecture
  host: [PackageSelector]
  # the section below is copied into the index.json and required at package installation
  run: [PackageSelector]
  # constrain optional packages (was `run_constrained`)
  run_constraints: [PackageSelector]
  # the run exports of this package
  run_exports: [PackageSelector] OR RunExports

  # the run exports to ignore when calculating the requirements
  ignore_run_exports:
    # ignore run exports by name (e.g. `libgcc-ng`)
    by_name: [string]
    # ignore run exports that come from the specified packages

>     from_package: [string]

Author: Why would you think it refers to a MatchSpec?
It refers to a single package _name_ (string). Same for both of these options.

>     from_package: [string]

Author: I fail to see the use case for a matchspec here.

>     from_package: [string]

Reviewer 6: Oh, I'm not suggesting to use `MatchSpec`.
I just wanted to note that `conda-build` accepts more than just the name in those fields.
Looking at the code at
- https://github.com/conda/conda-build/blob/3.28.0/conda_build/render.py#L418
- https://github.com/conda/conda-build/blob/3.28.0/conda_build/render.py#L238
it seems to (effectively with some manual string handling) mostly concern itself with the names too.
We should just look out for such oddities so that any incompatibility between the old and new recipe formats are deliberate.

----
> Why would you think it refers to a MatchSpec?
> It refers to a single package _name_ (string). Same for both of these options.

I'd hope it refers to just the names :).
Since there is a naming inconsistency (`_name`/`_package`) is it not unreasonable to wonder if there is a behavioral difference too, is all I'm saying.

```

#### PackageSelector

A `PackageSelector` in the recipe is currently defined as a string with up to two whitespaces, looking like this:

```
<name> <version> <build_string>

# examples:
python
python 3.8
python 3.8 h1234567_0
python >=3.8,<3.9
python >=3.8,<3.9 h1234567_0
python 3.9.*
```

> [!NOTE]
> `MatchSpec` are defined with many more options in conda. We are sticking to conda-build's definition for the time being.
> For example, `conda` MatchSpecs allow specifying a channel, a build number (in square brackets) and many additional things.

> > We might homogenize these things later on.

Reviewer 6: I think it's fine/good to use a subset for now.
(E.g., in `meta.yaml` you could actually use direct links to package archives or something, but I don't think this is widely supported and will break with `libmamba` solver etc.)

(Also `MatchSpec` is not without issues and we should carefully consider where we use it and whether we might want to replace this with something else generally.)

  # files from $SRC_DIR
  source: [glob]
  # files from $RECIPE_DIR
  recipe: [glob]
```

#### Python test element

The python test element renders a `test_import.py` file that contains the imports to test.

```yaml
python:
  # list of imports to try
  imports: [string]
```

#### Downstream test element

The downstream test element renders to a `test_downstream.json` file that contains the `downstream` key with the raw "PackageSelector" string.

```yaml
downstream: PackageSelector
```

## Outputs section

conda-build has very hard to understand behavior with multiple outputs. We propose some drastic simplifications.
Each output in the new format has the same keys as a "top-level" recipe.

Values from the top-level `build`, `source` and `about` sections are (deeply) merged into each of the outputs.

The top-level package field is replaced by a top-level `recipe` field. The `version` from the top-level
`recipe` is also merged into each output. The top-level name is ignored (but could be used, e.g. for
the feedstock-name in the conda-forge case).

```yaml
# note: instead of `package`, it says `recipe` here
recipe:
  name: string # mostly ignored, could be used for feedstock name

>   version: string # merged into each output if not overwritten by output

Author: We also debated this. 

One alternative: keep the top-level `package` as is and rename the `package` in the outputs to `output: {name: ..., version: ...}`.

I think repeating the version for each output is somewhat annoying, unfortunately. But maybe I am overestimating how annoying it would be.

>   version: string # merged into each output if not overwritten by output

Reviewer 14: I think that is pretty annoying. I'd be inclined to remove this, and have the version here come from the top-level package/version key. That would also be the default for any output that didn't explicitly override it. But maybe I'm just set in my ways from the current way of doing things.

>   version: string # merged into each output if not overwritten by output

Reviewer: +1

Therefore, each variant is computed for each output individually.

Another tricky bit is that packages can be "strongly" connected with a `pin_subpackage(name, exact=True)` constraint.
In this case, the pinned package should also be part of the "variant configuration" for the output and appropriately zipped.

For example, we can have three outputs: `libmamba`, `libmambapy`, and `mamba`.

- `libmamba` -> creates a single variant as it is a low-level C++ library
- `libmambapy` -> creates multiple packages, one per python version
- `mamba` -> creates multiple packages (one per python + libmambapy version)

<img width="1527" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 48 59" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/3ddb7ddb-f563-4842-91d6-d9f8c91b83e0">

This has historically been an issue in conda-build, as it didn't take into account `pin_subpackage` edges as "variants" and
sometimes created the same hashes for two different outputs. E.g. in the following situation, conda-build would only create a single
`foofoo` package (instead of two variants that exactly pin two different libfoo packages):

> <img width="2065" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 47 49" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/0c3ec263-0d00-45a7-b6fc-84e9b8daffa6">

Reviewer 6: Technical detail: Such assets should be copied over alongside the CEP.

Reviewer: +1 and same for line 513

## About section

```yaml
about:
  # a summary of what this package does
  summary: string
  # a longer description of what this package does (should we allow referencing files here?)
  description: string

  # the license of the package in SPDX format
  license: string (SPDX enforced)
  # the license files
  license_file: path | [path] (relative paths are found in source directory _or_ recipe directory)
  # URL that points to the license – just stored as metadata
  license_url: url

  # URL to the homepage (used to be `home`)
  homepage: url
  # URL to the repository (used to be `dev_url`)

>   repository: url

Author: We based this off of cargo. It can be left out if there is no repository.

>   repository: url

Author: people can also still use the "homepage" url...

>   repository: url

Reviewer 6: In any case, I think we should still retain the 3 home/dev/doc (no matter the naming) since it is common for them to be distinct and/or have overlaps between any combination of them.

>   repository: url

Reviewer: I'd stick to development too.

## Major differences with conda-build

Outputs and top-level package are mutually exclusive, and outputs have exactly the same structure as top-level keys.
If outputs exist, the top-level keys are 'merged' with the output keys (e.g. for the about section).

# Format

## Schema version

The implicit version of the YAML schema for a recipe is an integer 1.
To discern between the "old" format and the new format, we utilize the file name.
The old format is `meta.yaml` and the new format is `recipe.yaml`.
The version can be explicitly set by adding a `schema_version` key to the recipe.

```yaml
# optional, since implicitly defaults to 1
schema_version: 1 # integer
```

To benefit from autocompletion, and other LSP features in editors, we can add a schema URL to the recipe.

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prefix-dev/recipe-format/main/schema.json
```

## Context section

```yaml
# The context dictionary defines arbitrary key-value pairs for Jinja interpolation
# and replaces the {% set ... %} commands commonly used in recipes
context:
  variable: test
  # note that we can reference previous values, that means that they are rendered in order

>   other_variable: test_${{ variable }}

Reviewer 6: As already requested in the previous CEP:
If we want recipes to conform to the YAML specification (which I strongly suggest we should!), we cannot do this.

Please refer to https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#3221-mapping-key-order :
> In the [representation](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#representation-graph) model, [mapping keys](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#nodes) do not have an order. To [serialize](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#serializing-the-representation-graph) a [mapping](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#mapping), it is necessary to impose an ordering on its [keys](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#nodes). This order is a [serialization detail](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#serializing-the-representation-graph) and should not be used when [composing](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#composing-the-representation-graph) the [representation graph](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#representation-graph) (and hence for the preservation of [application](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#processes-and-models) data). In every case where [node](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#nodes) order is significant, a [sequence](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#sequence) must be used. For example, an ordered [mapping](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#mapping) can be [represented](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#representation-graph) as a [sequence](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#sequence) of [mappings](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#mapping), where each [mapping](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#mapping) is a single [key/value pair](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#mapping). YAML provides convenient [compact notation](https://yaml.org/spec/1.2.2/#example-flow-mapping-adjacent-values) for this case.

To rephrase this for your proposal:
If you require some ordering in these mappings, then you're saying the recipes only conform to the specification of serialized YAML but not the YAML specification overall.
Which is not good since we're then again in a situation were we say "the recipes are YAML... but actually, only if you use certain tools to read/write them" (not as bad as "2 template formats on top one serialization format" as current `meta.yaml`, but related).

Meaning, this either has to be a list/sequence (e.g., `[{variable: test}, {other_variable: 'test_${{ variable }}'}]`) or require the consumer of these files to do topological sorting/cycle detection.

Author: I think this is no problem. We can easily create the "graph" from traversing the Jinja AST and finding the undefined variables. 

Most languages do have facilities to parse YAML into a Map that is sorted by insertion order (Rust and Python have it, for sure). So we can strongly encourage implementations to write (and read) this data in a sorted order.

Reviewer 6: There is a difference between a format specification and implementation details.
If I do
```python
recipe = yaml.load("recipe.yaml")
recipe["context"] = dict(sorted(recipe["context"].items()))
yaml.dump(recipe, "recipe.yaml")`
```
then this does *not* change the YAML representation as per the YAML specification.

You **do not conform to theYAML specification** if you require this.

> So we can strongly encourage implementations

Yes, I'd also suggest that an implementation should not change the order (having things stable causes less confusion and possible determinism).
But that does not mean the implementations should *have to* do that.
Otherwise, please don't name these files `.yaml`.

To reiterate: This is a specification bug that was already listed amongst others in https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/54#pullrequestreview-1515301216 .

Author: Sure. We _can_ topologically sort the context object. So we can get rid of this requirement (but still ask implementations to do it because it will be much more logical for humans).

Author: I added a note with more details and the request to implementations to do topological sorting.

```

## Package section

```yaml
package:
  # The name of the package
  name: string
  # The version of the package, following the conda version spec
  # Note that versions are always strings (1.23 is _not_ a valid version since it is a `float`. Needs to be quoted.)
  version: string
```

## Build section

```yaml
build:
  # the build number
  number: Option<integer>, defaults to 0

  # the build string. This is usually ommited (can use `${{ hash }}` variable here)
  string: Option<string>, defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

  # A list of conditions under which to skip the build of this package (they are joined by `or`)

>   skip: [list of expressions]

Reviewer 6: (I wouldn't mind if we turn this into a non-negative version (i.e., declare on what to build for, not what to skip) -- but I'd postpone that to some future discussion.)

Author: agree, but needs a lot of discussion. Let's do that in a future one.

  # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"

>   noarch: Option<"generic" | "python">

Reviewer 6: It would be a good opportunity to start to split `noarch: python` into `noarch` and `package-type: python` (not that we have to use the `package-type` naming, but you get the gist).

This separation of concerns should be done upstream in `conda` etc. -- but that needs changing of index data format.
It would be good to prepare recipes for such separation, though.
For now, an package building tool would still output `noarch: python` -- but it could simply switch to a new index format once that is available (so that we don't have to change recipes again at that point).

Author: I think this needs more careful thoughts. Lets do this in a future CEP. 

We also would like to support Python3 stable ABI packages - they are not `noarch` but still need special hadnling to move the contents to the correct `site-packages` folder.

Author: PS this proposal already got rid of the `noarch: true` option :)

Reviewer 6: > I think this needs more careful thoughts. Lets do this in a future CEP.

I would be fine with postponing this -- but it would also be good if we can handle this before the new recipe format sees wider use.

> We also would like to support Python3 stable ABI packages - they are not `noarch` but still need special hadnling to move the contents to the correct `site-packages` folder.

Yes, that makes sense.
As such it would be good to move this into a package-type-specific section (you already proposed `python:` -- which is a good thing!).

Author: I think even later we can easily mechanically update the recipes to what you are envisioning.

  string: string  # defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

  # A list of Jinja conditions under which to skip the build of this package (they are joined by `or`)
  # What is valid in a an `if:` condition is valid
  skip: [list of expressions]

  # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"
  noarch: OneOf<"generic" | "python">

  # script can be a single string or a list of strings
  # if script is a single string and ends with `.sh` or `.bat`, then we interpret it as a file
  script: string | [string] | Script

  # would love to get rid of this:
  # merge the build and host environments (used in many R packages on Windows)
  # was `merge_build_host`
  merge_build_and_host_envs: bool (defaults to false)

  # include files even if they are already in the environment
  # as part of some other host dependency
  always_include_files: [path]

  # do not soft- or hard-link these files, but always copy them was `no_link`
  always_copy_files: [glob]

  variant:
    # Keys to forcibly use for the variant computation (even if they are not in the dependencies)

>     use_keys: [string]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    use_keys: string | [string]
```

As per line 118, but maybe we do want to only require lists.

    # used on conda-forge, still needed?
    preserve_egg_dir: bool (default false)

    # skip compiling pyc for some files (was `skip_compile_pyc`)
    skip_pyc_compilation: [glob]

    # This is only used in the pip feedstock.
    disable_pip: bool (defaults to false)

> 

Reviewer 6: Let's outright remove this.
This is more or less just a redundant thing for `conda-build` to do the same as `add_pip_as_python_dependency: false`.
We should not carry these one-off settings over to the new format.
conda-forge already builds with `add_pip_as_python_dependency: false` generally -- if Anaconda or whoever else builds `pip` as a Conda package doesn't do it, they just should.

>     # PythonEntryPoint: `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`

Reviewer 14: This was a tiny bit unclear to me whether this parameter accepted either a string or a list of strings. I'm not sure if this addition makes things any clearer, so feel free to reject or modify as you see fit.

```suggestion
    # List of strings, where each string follows this format:
    # PythonEntryPoint: `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`
```

    entry_points: [PythonEntryPoint]

    # Specifies if python.app should be used as the entrypoint on macOS
    # was `osx_is_app`
    use_python_app_entrypoint: bool (defaults to false)  # macOS only!

    # used on conda-forge, still needed?
    preserve_egg_dir: bool (default false)

    # skip compiling pyc for some files (was `skip_compile_pyc`)
    skip_pyc_compilation: [glob]

  # settings concerning the prefix detection in files
  prefix_detection:
    # force the file type of the given files to be TEXT or BINARY

>     # for prefix replacement

Reviewer 16: For clarity, we should define what TEXT and BINARY mean in this context.

    missing_dso_allowlist: [glob]

    # Allow runpath / rpath to point to these locations outside of the environment
    # (was `runpath_whitelist`)
    rpath_allowlist: [glob]

    # what to do when detecting overdepending
    overdepending_behavior: OneOf<"ignore" | "error"> # (defaults to "error")

    # what to do when detecting overlinking
    overlinking_behavior: OneOf<"ignore" | "error"> # (defaults to "error")

  # REMOVED:
  # pre-link: string (was deprecated for a long time)
  # Whether to include the recipe or not in the final package - should be specified on command line or other config file?
  # noarch_python: bool
  # features: list
  # msvc_compiler: str
  # requires_features: dict
  # provides_features: dict
  # preferred_env: str
  # preferred_env_executable_paths: list
  # disable_pip: bool
  # marked as "still experimental"
  # pin_depends: Enum<"record" | "strict">
  # overlinking_ignore_patterns: [glob]
  # defaults to patchelf (only cudatoolkit is using `lief` for some reason)
  # rpaths_patcher: None
  # post-link: path
  # pre-unlink: path
  # pre-link: path
```

### Script section

```yaml
script:
  # the interpreter to use for the script

>   interpreter: string  # defaults to bash on UNIX and cmd.exe on Windows

Reviewer 16: Is the intention here to force conda build (or equivalent) to explicitly invoke `bash`, or are we going to assume that `/bin/sh` or `/usr/bin/env sh` is actually bash? (Moving forward, I'm not sure it's safe to assume `sh` and `bash` are equivalent.)

  # the script environment. You can use Jinja to pass through environment variables
  # with the `env` key (`${{ env.get("MYVAR") }}`).
  env: {string: string}
  # secrets that are set as env variables but never shown in the logs or the environment
  # The variables are taken from the parent environment by name (e.g. `MY_SECRET`)
  secrets: [string]
  # The file to use as the script. Automatically adds `bat` or `sh` to the filename

>   # on Windows or UNIX respectively (if no file extension is given).

Reviewer 16: I'm not sure I like the idea of automatically appending a extension, especially on *nix where file extensions historically have had no particular semantics. I'm not sure why conda build should care if `build-my-pkg` is written in any particular language, especially if I've already specified `interpreter`. (E.g., if I've provided `interpreter: "/usr/bin/env python"` and specify `file: foo`, I don't want conda build trying to run `python foo.sh`.)

Reviewer 9: If you want to run a python file you should just specify the extension `foo.py`? I think it's probably ok to not support running files without an extension?

  file: string  # build.sh or build.bat

>   # A string or list of strings that is the script contents (mutually exclusive with `file`)

Reviewer 16: We should define what should happen if both `file` and `content` appear in the same recipe specification file. (Error out vs. one taking priority)

  file: str  # build.sh  
  # A string or list of strings that is the script contents (mutually exclusive with `file`)
  content: str | [str]
```

## Source section

```yaml
source: [SourceElement]
```

where the different source elements are defined as follows.

### URL source

```yaml
# url pointing to the source tar.gz|zip|tar.bz2|... (this can be a list of mirrors that point to the same file)
url: url | [url]
# destination folder in work directory
target_directory: path
# rename the downloaded file to this name
file_name: str
# hash of the file
sha256: hex string
# legacy md5 sum of the file (test both, prefer sha256)
md5: hex string
# relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]

> ```

Reviewer 6: This is missing the `no_hoist` option.
(Not saying it is a very good option; but that functionality would be lost.)

Examples for where this is used are the CDT packages in conda-forge, e.g., https://github.com/conda-forge/cdt-builds/blob/66808da23b025f89cb40c9c725cf707f9caa4cfa/cdts/alsa-lib-cos7-x86_64/meta.yaml#L8

We could replace this with something better (better name, better functionality), see
https://github.com/conda/conda-build/issues/3595 ,esp., https://github.com/conda/conda-build/issues/3595#issuecomment-509339146 onward.

(An option to prevent the build tool from extracting an archive (can't remember if one exists) would also be good -- but that can be proposed later.)

Author: Hmm, I do not understand what no_hoist does. After reading the issue/Pr I get an idea (keep parent folders of the tar around).

I don't find it documented at all: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/latest/search.html?q=no_hoist

I understand that CDT packages are being phased out?

I did also think about an option to prevent the automatic extraction of a tarball. Maybe we should rather do that (and then people can do whatever they want in the build script)?

like an extra option:

```
extract: true / false
or 
auto_extract: true/false (default to true)
```

Author: Or `extract_archive: true / false`

Author: How about an "extract_archive" option @beckermr? Then in the build script we could still extract the archive with any options available to the `tar` installed in the build env.

Reviewer 2: That will make more work for someone else when they convert recipes with it. I'm not a huge fan of that.

Author: No gaiiin without paiiin. More seriously, some of the reorderings here already mean that we will need a more powerful converter.

I relatively strongly disagree with the `no_hoist` option as I don't understand it from the option alone.

In fact in `rattler-build` we don't do any of the "hoisting" anyways. So I am wondering if this is the wrong idea from the start and the default should always be to "not hoist". 

If someone has a deeply nested tar ball then they will just have to cd into the right directory.

Reviewer: Any decisions here? I like `extract`.

A path can be either:

- directory ("../bla")
- a path to an archive ("../bla.tar.gz")
- a path to a file ("../bla.txt")

```yaml
# file, absolute or relative to recipe file
path: path
# if there is a gitignore, adhere to it and ignore files that are matched by the ignore rules
# i.e. only copy the subset of files that are not ignored by the rules
use_gitignore: bool (defaults to true)
# destination folder
target_directory: path
# rename the downloaded file to this name
file_name: string
# absolute or relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Git source

```yaml
# URL to the git repository or path to local git repository
git: url | path
# the following 3 keys are mutually exclusive (branch, tag, and rev)
# branch to checkout to
branch: string
# tag to checkout to
tag: string
# revision to checkout to (hash or ref)

> rev: string

Reviewer 16: We should clarify what happens if more than one is specified (error vs precedence).

rev: string
# depth of the git clone (mutually exclusive with rev)
depth: signed integer (defaults to -1 -> not shallow)
# should this use git-lfs?
lfs: bool (defaults to false)
# destination folder in work directory
target_directory: path
# absolute or relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Removed source definitions

SVN and HG (mercury) source definitions are removed as they are not relevant anymore.

## Requirements section

```yaml
requirements:
  # build time dependencies, in the build_platform architecture
  build: [PackageSelector]
  # dependencies to link against, in the target_platform architecture
  host: [PackageSelector]
  # the section below is copied into the index.json and required at package installation
  run: [PackageSelector]
  # constrain optional packages (was `run_constrained`)

>   run_constraints: [PackageSelector]

Reviewer 6: Keep in mind that we then have:
- `constrains` as the actual key that is used in the index data later,
- `run_constrained` as the old key in `meta.yaml`,
- `run_constraints` as the new key in `recipe.yaml`.

maybe it makes sense to use a uniform one, i.e., `constrains`(/`run_constrains`)?

(Personally, I don't care much about the naming. But it is bound to confuse people if we use multiple names.)

Author: I'll ask this in tonights meeting.

Reviewer 17: Oh, dang, yeah, let's stay consistent

Reviewer 3: https://thecontentauthority.com/blog/constrain-vs-constraint
>‘Constrain’ means to restrict or limit something or someone. It often implies an external force or influence that is imposing the restriction. For example, “The budget constraints prevented us from hiring more staff.”

>‘Constraint’, on the other hand, refers to a limitation or restriction that is inherent in a situation or system. It can also refer to the rules or regulations that govern a particular activity or process. For example, “The constraints of the project timeline meant that we had to work overtime to meet the deadline.”

Here we really mean constraints right?

Author: The example for `constrains` uses `constraints`? :D 

I think one can say that these are "added constraints" for the environment. But I am not a native english speaker which is partially why I want to ask in 4 minutes :)

Reviewer 2: The index name is wrong according to my native ears but matches "depends" (which is also not a noun). "Depends" also does not match its corresponding section in requirements/run which is another fun mismatch.

Reviewer 2: The index is really an internal api and so I don't think should influence the recipe spec which is meant for use by folks not developing conda build.

Reviewer 2: Hence I agree with constraints

Another tricky bit is that packages can be "strongly" connected with a `pin_subpackage(name, exact=True)` constraint.
In this case, the pinned package should also be part of the "variant configuration" for the output and appropriately zipped.

For example, we can have three outputs: `libmamba`, `libmambapy`, and `mamba`.

- `libmamba` -> creates a single variant as it is a low-level C++ library
- `libmambapy` -> creates multiple packages, one per python version
- `mamba` -> creates multiple packages (one per python + libmambapy version)

<img width="1527" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 48 59" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/3ddb7ddb-f563-4842-91d6-d9f8c91b83e0">

This has historically been an issue in conda-build, as it didn't take into account `pin_subpackage` edges as "variants" and
sometimes created the same hashes for two different outputs. E.g. in the following situation, conda-build would only create a single
`foofoo` package (instead of two variants that exactly pin two different libfoo packages):

<img width="2065" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-01 at 15 47 49" src="https://github.com/wolfv/ceps/assets/885054/0c3ec263-0d00-45a7-b6fc-84e9b8daffa6">

> ## About section

Reviewer 16: I would be clear about whether this section (or some subset of it) is _actually_ required. The metadata here is useful for major players in the ecosystem (Anaconda, conda-forge, bioconda, etc.), but for J. Random Person trying to generate a conda package for their own tiny channel, requiring things like an SPDX license field seems overly burdensome.

  and more)
- remove any need for recursive parsing & solving
- cater to needs for automation and dependency tree analysis via a determinstic
  format

## Major differences with conda-build

Outputs and top-level package are mutually exclusive, and outputs have exactly the same structure as top-level keys.
If outputs exist, the top-level keys are 'merged' with the output keys (e.g. for the about section).

# Format

## Schema version

The implicit version of the YAML schema for a recipe is an integer 1.
To discern between the "old" format and the new format, we utilize the file name.
The old format is `meta.yaml` and the new format is `recipe.yaml`.
The version can be explicitly set by adding a `schema_version` key to the recipe.

```yaml
# optional, since implicitly defaults to 1
schema_version: 1 # integer
```

To benefit from autocompletion, and other LSP features in editors, we can add a schema URL to the recipe.

```yaml
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/prefix-dev/recipe-format/main/schema.json
```

## Context section

The context section is a dictionary with key-value pairs that can be used for string interpolation.

> The right-hand side of the key-value pair is a scalar (bool, number or string).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The value must be a scalar (bool, number or string).
```

Reviewer: Can it be `null` too?

The variables can reference other variables from the context section.

> > ![NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

as per https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/16925

> The order of the keys is not enforced by the YAML standard. We expect parsers to parse maps (especially the context section)
> in the order they are defined in the file. However, we do not require this behavior for the recipe to be valid to conform to the YAML standard.
> Given this, implementations need to ensure topological sorting is done before string interpolation.

```yaml
# The context dictionary defines arbitrary key-value pairs for Jinja interpolation
# and replaces the {% set ... %} commands commonly used in recipes

> context:

Reviewer: Can conditionals be used here? I can imagine folks wanting to do something like they used to do in meta.yaml with build_numbers:

```yaml
context:
  build_number: 0
  final_build_number: ${{ build_number + 0 if mpi else 0 }}
```

This also makes me wonder whether expressions are allowed in the conditionals or only scalars with no operators or methods.

If not (that's fine), we should probably document it.

  variable: test
  # note that we can reference previous values, that means that they are rendered in order
  other_variable: test_${{ variable }}
```

> ## Package section

Reviewer: Is this section required? If it is, we should write that down.

```yaml
package:
  # The name of the package
  name: string
  # The version of the package, following the conda version spec
  # Note that versions are always strings (1.23 is _not_ a valid version since it is a `float`. Needs to be quoted.)
  version: string
```

## Build section

```yaml
build:
  # the build number
  number: integer  # defaults to 0

>   # the build string. This is usually ommited (can use `${{ hash }}` variable here)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # the build string. This is usually ommitted (can use `${{ hash }}` variable here)
```

  string: string  # defaults to a build string made from "package hash & build number"

  # A list of Jinja conditions under which to skip the build of this package (they are joined by `or`)

>   # What is valid in a an `if:` condition is valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # What is valid in an `if:` condition is valid
```

  skip: [list of expressions]

>   # wether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, wether it is "generic" or "python"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # whether the package is a noarch package, and if yes, whether it is "generic" or "python"
```

This can also be `null` right?

  noarch: OneOf<"generic" | "python">

  # script can be a single string or a list of strings

>   # if script is a single string and ends with `.sh` or `.bat`, then we interpret it as a file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # if script is a single-line string and ends with `.sh` or `.bat`, then we interpret it as a file
```

I guess? :D

Reviewer: Wait, we also have a `script` section below. Isn't this redundant? I'd rather just keep the section and forget about this key in `build`.

  script: string | [string] | Script

>   # would love to get rid of this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  # merge the build and host environments (used in many R packages on Windows)
  # was `merge_build_host`
  merge_build_and_host_envs: bool (defaults to false)

  # include files even if they are already in the environment
  # as part of some other host dependency
  always_include_files: [path]

  # do not soft- or hard-link these files, but always copy them was `no_link`
  always_copy_files: [glob]

  variant:
    # Keys to forcibly use for the variant computation (even if they are not in the dependencies)
    use_keys: [string]

    # Keys to forcibly ignore for the variant computation (even if they are in the dependencies)
    ignore_keys: [string]

    # used to prefer this variant less
    # note: was `track_features`
    down_prioritize_variant: integer (negative, defaults to 0)

  # settings concerning only Python
  python:
    # List of strings, where each string follows this format:

>     # PythonEntryPoint: `bsdiff4 = bsdiff4.cli:main_bsdiff4`

Reviewer: I never understood why this is not a map, but I guess the `:` in the syntax makes it confusing for the YAML parser (it would always need to be quoted?).

    preserve_egg_dir: bool (default false)

    # skip compiling pyc for some files (was `skip_compile_pyc`)
    skip_pyc_compilation: [glob]

  # settings concerning the prefix detection in files
  prefix_detection:
    # force the file type of the given files to be TEXT or BINARY
    # for prefix replacement
    force_file_type:
      # force TEXT file type
      # was `???`
      text: [glob]
      # force binary file type
      # was `???`
      binary: [glob]

    # ignore all or specific files for prefix replacement
    # was `ignore_prefix_files`
    ignore: bool | [path] (defaults to false)

    # wether to detect binary files with prefix or not
    # was `detect_binary_files_with_prefix`
    ignore_binary_files: bool (defaults to true on Unix and (always) false on Windows)

  # settings for shared libraries and executables
  dynamic_linking:
    # linux only, list of rpaths (was rpath)
    rpaths: [path] (defaults to ['lib/'])

    # wether to relocate binaries or not. If this is a list of paths, then
    # only the listed paths are relocated
    binary_relocation: bool (defaults to true) | [glob]

    # Allow linking against libraries that are not in the run requirements

>     # (was `missing_dso_whitelist`)

Reviewer: <3

    missing_dso_allowlist: [glob]

    # Allow runpath / rpath to point to these locations outside of the environment
    # (was `runpath_whitelist`)
    rpath_allowlist: [glob]

    # what to do when detecting overdepending
    overdepending_behavior: OneOf<"ignore" | "error"> # (defaults to "error")

    # what to do when detecting overlinking

>     overlinking_behavior: OneOf<"ignore" | "error"> # (defaults to "error")

Reviewer: Will `ignore` also print a warning or literally omit the report? Or the calculation? Maybe we need three options:

- skip
- warn
- error

  # REMOVED:
  # pre-link: string (was deprecated for a long time)
  # Wether to include the recipe or not in the final package - should be specified on command line or other config file?
  # include_recipe: bool (defaults to true)
  # noarch_python: bool
  # features: list
  # msvc_compiler: str
  # requires_features: dict
  # provides_features: dict
  # preferred_env: str
  # preferred_env_executable_paths: list
  # disable_pip: bool
  # marked as "still experimental"
  # pin_depends: Enum<"record" | "strict">
  # overlinking_ignore_patterns: [glob]
  # defaults to patchelf (only cudatoolkit is using `lief` for some reason)
  # rpaths_patcher: None
  # post-link: path
  # pre-unlink: path
  # pre-link: path
```

> ### Script section

Reviewer: Is this a top-level section or the "value type" for the `script` key in `build`?

Reviewer 16: Seems to be `build/script` based on the Markdown header depth, but yeah, I think that should be clarified.

```yaml
script:
  # the interpreter to use for the script
  interpreter: string  # defaults to bash on UNIX and cmd.exe on Windows
  # the script environment. You can use Jinja to pass through environment variables
  # with the `env` key (`${{ env.get("MYVAR") }}`).
  env: {string: string}

>   # secrets that are set as env variables but never shown in the logs or the environment

Reviewer: I'm assuming we only pass the environment variable _name_ here, right?

  secrets: [string]
  # The file to use as the script. Automatically adds `bat` or `sh` to the filename
  # on Windows or UNIX respectively (if no file extension is given).
  file: string  # build.sh or build.bat
  # A string or list of strings that is the script contents (mutually exclusive with `file`)
  content: string | [string]
```

## Source section

```yaml
source: [SourceElement]
```

where the different source elements are defined as follows.

### URL source

```yaml
# url pointing to the source tar.gz|zip|tar.bz2|... (this can be a list of mirrors that point to the same file)
url: url | [url]
# destination folder in work directory
target_directory: path
# rename the downloaded file to this name
file_name: string
# hash of the file
sha256: hex string
# legacy md5 sum of the file (test both, prefer sha256)
md5: hex string
# relative path from recipe file
patches: [path]
```

### Local source

A path can be either:

- directory ("../bla")
- a path to an archive ("../bla.tar.gz")
- a path to a file ("../bla.txt")

```yaml
# file, absolute or relative to recipe file
path: path

> # if there is a gitignore, adhere to it (or not)

Reviewer: Can you elaborate here what this implies? That those files will _not_ be copied over?

Before, the test section was written to a single folder (`info/test`). In the new format, we propose to write each test element to a separate folder
(`info/tests/<index>`). This allows us to run each test element independently.

```yaml
tests: [TestElement]
```

#### Command test element

The command test element renders to a single folder with a `test_time_dependencies.json` with two keys (`build` and `run`) that contain the raw "PackageSelector" strings.
The `script` is rendered to a `script.json` that contains the `interpreter`, `env` and other keys (as defined in the `Script` section).
Files are copied into the `info/tests/<index>` folder.

```yaml
# script to execute
# reuse script definition from above
script: string | [string] | Script
# optional extra requirements
requirements:
  # extra requirements with build_platform architecture (emulators, ...)
  build: [PackageSelector]
  # extra run dependencies
  run: [PackageSelector]

# extra files to add to the package for the test
files:
  # files from $SRC_DIR
  source: [glob]
  # files from $RECIPE_DIR
  recipe: [glob]
```

#### Python test element

> The python test element renders a `test_import.py` file that contains the imports to test.

Reviewer: As an aside note, a naive script with:

```python
import a
import b
import c
```

is not the best because it'll fail early. I'd prefer if the implementations do something like:

```python
errors = []

try:
  import a
except Exception as exc:
  errors.append(("a", exc, traceback))
...

# report all errors
```

> It also automatically runs the `pip check` command to check for missing dependencies.

Reviewer: This means that `pip` must be always injected in the test environment? Or is it running from the tool (rattler-build) environment? This might cause hard-to-debug conflicts in the test env if the user's package is not compatible with part of the `pip` dependency tree (arguably a very small fraction, but I thought I should bring it up).

Reviewer 16: I'm also not keen on automatically running `pip check`, especially since optional features and dependencies are a thing. Need to dig out the specific package name, but we have run into issues where `pip check` failed because we (as packagers) explicitly decided to turn off a feature but had no way of informing pip of that change.

```yaml
python:
  # list of imports to try
  imports: [string]
  pip_check: bool  # defaults to true
```

#### Downstream test element

The downstream test element renders to a `test_downstream.json` file that contains the `downstream` key with the raw "PackageSelector" string.

```yaml
downstream: PackageSelector
```

## Outputs section

conda-build has very hard to understand behavior with multiple outputs. We propose some drastic simplifications.
Each output in the new format has the same keys as a "top-level" recipe.

Values from the top-level `build`, `source` and `about` sections are (deeply) merged into each of the outputs.

The top-level package field is replaced by a top-level `recipe` field. The `version` from the top-level
`recipe` is also merged into each output. The top-level name is ignored (but could be used, e.g. for
the feedstock-name in the conda-forge case).

```yaml
# note: instead of `package`, it says `recipe` here
recipe:
  name: string # mostly ignored, could be used for feedstock name
  version: string # merged into each output if not overwritten by output

outputs:

>   - package:
>       name: string
>       version: string (defaults to top-level version)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: string
    # version: always points to top-level version, cannot be changed.
```

    build:
      script: ...
    requirements:
      # same definition as top level

>     # same definitions as on top level, by default merged from outer recipe

Reviewer: I'd define what merge means here:

* The output value overwrites the top-level value
* The two values are merged key-wise
* The two values are merged value-wise

Reviewer 16: +1

    about:
    source:
    tests:
```

Before the build, the outputs are topologically sorted by their dependencies. Each output acts as an independent recipe.

> > **Note**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

  # URL that points to the license – just stored as metadata
  license_url: url

  # URL to the homepage (used to be `home`)
  homepage: url
  # URL to the repository (used to be `dev_url`)
  repository: url
  # URL to the documentation (used to be `doc_url`)
  documentation: url

  # REMOVED:
  # prelink_message:
  # license_family: string (deprecated due to SPDX)
  # identifiers: [string]
  # tags: [string]
  # keywords: [string]
  # doc_source_url: url
```

## Extra section

```yaml
# a free form YAML dictionary
extra:
  <key>: <value>
```

## Example recipe

What follows is an example recipe, using the YAML syntax discussed in https://github.com/conda-incubator/ceps/pull/54

```yaml
context:
  name: xtensor
  version: 0.24.6

package:
  name: ${{ name|lower }}
  version: ${{ version }}

source:
  url: https://github.com/xtensor-stack/xtensor/archive/${{ version }}.tar.gz
  sha256: f87259b51aabafdd1183947747edfff4cff75d55375334f2e81cee6dc68ef655

build:
  number: 0
  skip:
    # note that the value is a minijinja expression
    - osx or win

requirements:
  build:
    - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
    - cmake
    - if: unix

>       value: make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      then: make
```

  host:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8
  run:
    - xtl >=0.7,<0.8
  run_constraints:
    - xsimd >=8.0.3,<10

tests:
  - script:
      - if: unix
        then:
          - test -d ${PREFIX}/include/xtensor
          - test -f ${PREFIX}/include/xtensor/xarray.hpp
          - test -f ${PREFIX}/share/cmake/xtensor/xtensorConfig.cmake
          - test -f ${PREFIX}/share/cmake/xtensor/xtensorConfigVersion.cmake
      - if: win

>         value:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        value:
```
```suggestion
        then:
```

          - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\include\xtensor\xarray.hpp (exit 1)
          - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\share\cmake\xtensor\xtensorConfig.cmake (exit 1)
          - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\share\cmake\xtensor\xtensorConfigVersion.cmake (exit 1)
  # compile a test package
  - if: unix
    then:
      files:
        - testfiles/cmake/*
      requirements:
        build:
          - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
          - cmake
          - ninja
      script: |
        cd testiles/cmake/
        mkdir build; cd build
        cmake -GNinja ..
        cmake --build .
        ./target/hello_world

  - downstream: xtensor-python
  - downstream: xtensor-blas
  - python:
      imports:
        - xtensor_python
        - xtensor_python.numpy_adapter
```

Or a multi-output package

```yaml
context:
  name: mamba
  libmamba_version: "1.4.2"
  libmambapy_version: "1.4.2"
  # can also reference previous variables here

>   mamba_version: ${{ libmamba_version }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  mamba_version: "${{ libmamba_version }}"
```

Does the Jinja-like replacement introduce quotes too?

  release: "2023.04.06"
  libmamba_version_split: ${{ libmamba_version.split('.') }}

# we can leave this out
# package:
#   name: mamba-split

# this is inherited by every output
source:
  url: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba/archive/refs/tags/${{ release }}.tar.gz
  sha256: bc1ec3de0dd8398fcc6f524e6607d9d8f6dfeeedb2208ebe0f2070c8fd8fdd83

build:
  number: 0

outputs:

>   - package:
>       name: libmamba
>       version: ${{ libmamba_version }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: libmamba
    # version: always the same as top-level
```

          - if: unix
            then:
              - test -d ${PREFIX}/include/mamba
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/include/mamba/version.hpp
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/lib/cmake/libmamba/libmambaConfig.cmake
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/lib/cmake/libmamba/libmambaConfigVersion.cmake
              - test -e ${PREFIX}/lib/libmamba${SHLIB_EXT}
            else:
              - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\include\mamba\version.hpp (exit 1)
              - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\lib\cmake\libmamba\libmambaConfig.cmake (exit 1)
              - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\lib\cmake\libmamba\libmambaConfigVersion.cmake (exit 1)
              - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\bin\libmamba.dll (exit 1)
              - if not exist %LIBRARY_PREFIX%\lib\libmamba.lib (exit 1)
          - if: unix
            then:
              - cat $PREFIX/include/mamba/version.hpp | grep "LIBMAMBA_VERSION_MAJOR ${{ libmamba_version_split[0] }}"
              - cat $PREFIX/include/mamba/version.hpp | grep "LIBMAMBA_VERSION_MINOR ${{ libmamba_version_split[1] }}"
              - cat $PREFIX/include/mamba/version.hpp | grep "LIBMAMBA_VERSION_PATCH ${{ libmamba_version_split[2] }}"

>   - package:
>       name: libmambapy
>       version: ${{ libmambapy_version }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: libmambapy
    # version: always the same as top-level
```

    build:
      script: ${{ "build_mamba.sh" if unix else "build_mamba.bat" }}
      string: py${{ CONDA_PY }}h${{ PKG_HASH }}_${{ PKG_BUILDNUM }}

    requirements:
      build:
        - ${{ compiler('cxx') }}
        - cmake
        - ninja
        - if: build_platform != target_platform
          then:
            - python
            - cross-python_${{ target_platform }}
            - pybind11
            - pybind11-abi
      host:
        - python
        - pip
        - pybind11
        - pybind11-abi
        - openssl
        - yaml-cpp
        - cpp-expected
        - spdlog
        - fmt
        - termcolor-cpp
        - nlohmann_json
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', exact=True) }}
      run:
        - python
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmamba', exact=True) }}

      run_exports:
        - ${{ pin_subpackage('libmambapy', max_pin='x.x') }}

      ignore_run_exports:
        from_package:
          - spdlog

    tests:
      - python:
          imports:
            - libmambapy
            - libmambapy.bindings
      - script:
          - python -c "import libmambapy._version; assert libmambapy._version.__version__ == '${{ libmambapy_version }}'"

>   - package:
>       name: mamba
>       version: ${{ mamba_version }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: mamba
    # version: always the same as top-level
```

          imports: [mamba]

      - requirements:
          run:
            - pip
        script:
          - mamba --help
          # check dependencies with pip
          - pip check
          - if: win
            then:
              - if exist %PREFIX%\condabin\mamba.bat (exit 0) else (exit 1)
          - if: linux
            then:
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/etc/profile.d/mamba.sh
              # these tests work when run on win, but for some reason not during conda build
              - mamba create -n test_py2 python=2.7 --dry-run
              - mamba install xtensor xsimd -c conda-forge --dry-run

          - if: unix
            then:
              - test -f ${PREFIX}/condabin/mamba

          # for some reason tqdm doesn't have a proper colorama dependency so pip check fails
          # but that's completely unrelated to mamba
          - python -c "import mamba._version; assert mamba._version.__version__ == '${{ mamba_version }}'"

about:
  homepage: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba
  license: BSD-3-Clause
  license_file: LICENSE
  summary: A fast drop-in alternative to conda, using libsolv for dependency resolution
  description: Just a package manager

>   repository: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  development: https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba
```
